>> I'm going to take you
back to three years ago.
I was mid-30s, single, in LA,
desperately wanting babies,
and feeling that
biological clock ticking.
Thankfully I was in
very good company.
Many of my peers were in
the exact same situation
as were many of the women
coming into my practice.
The truth is women are
waiting longer to conceive.
And this is a beautiful thing.
We're more relationship
stable, financially stable,
emotionally stable.
We've had time to have
fulfilling careers
and do our inner work.
But the biological clock hasn't
quite caught up with society.
Now I had something that
my peers and my patients
did not have.
I had seven years of
experience witnessing what
many would consider miracles.
For example, I had a 42-year-old
woman come into my office.
She had, had a failed round
of IVF at 36, zero embryos.
Failed round of IVF at 40,
zero embryos came to me at 42.
If fertility is
really about age,
then I should not have been able
to get her any better results.
But after a number of
months working together,
and one final round of
IVF, she and her husband
got nine grade A embryos.
Pretty impressive, right?
So this showed me that fertility
is about more than chronological
age.
Despite what we're told, we
know that infertility rates
are rising.
And we know that age is
the number one risk factor.
But I had seen differently.
It did not stop me from
feeling the pressure
of my own biological
clock ticking.
Now until I learned
about biological age.
So biological age is the
age of our cells, which
is different from
chronological age, which
is how old we are based on our
birthday, which we can't change
unless we're forging documents.
Whereas biological age is a
marker of cellular health.
An advanced biological
age is actually
an increased risk factor
for every disease, including
infertility.
But we've actually known
this before science.
I mean, we can have two
women who are 40 years old
and one can look closer to 30
and one can look closer to 50.
But the same thing is
happening on the inside.
We just don't know
until we test,
inter-biological age testing.
I was introduced to
this in my practice.
And like with most
things in my practice,
I'm going to try
it on myself first.
And with my knowledge
and my experience
helping optimize
health and fertility,
I was literally convinced I
was doing everything right.
And I was convinced I was
going to come back at 28.
I was 33 at the time.
But I was so convinced
I am doing my sample
and chanting to
myself 28, 28, 28.
So I send my sample off.
I get my results.
And imagine my surprise when
I don't come back at 28,
I don't even come back at 33.
I came back four years older.
So again, I'm mid-30s,
single, in LA, wanting babies.
This is a fertility
death sentence.
Woof.
So my first response, very
logical, complete denial.
Maybe this has nothing
to do with fertility.
So I went to the research.
Unfortunately, found
a paper showing
that advanced biological age,
meaning biological age was older
than chronological age, did show
poorer outcomes in fertility,
meaning women got fewer
eggs, fewer healthy embryos
when they were
going through things
like egg freezing and IVF.
This is what we
have research on.
It also showed that
even younger women.
So someone who was
chronologically 28 who we think
should be healthy,
vital, fertile.
If her biological age came
back older, let's say 30,
she had poorer outcomes
with egg retrieval and IVF.
So between this and my
42-year-old female with nine
grade A embryos,
I had lots of data
showing that
biological age was more
important than
chronological age when
it came to fertility to a point
menopause is still real so far.
But this meant that I
had to face the music.
My results were real,
which brought me
to my second response, which
was an emotional meltdown.
So I let myself get into fetal
position on my bedroom floor.
I let my heart crack open.
I let the tears
flow down my eyes.
And I imagined a
world where I never
got to be a mother
because time ran out.
Now I'm not one
to give up easily.
And I absolutely believe in
the healing power of the body.
So after I let the emotions move
through, I picked myself back up
and I made it my
mission to figure out
how to rewind that biological
clock first for myself,
and then for every
single woman who
feels the pressure of the
biological clock ticking.
So I went to what
was working, what
was working in my practice, what
was working in the research.
And at the time, there
were only two papers
published showing it was
even possible to rewind
the biological clock.
And it was using medications.
I wasn't about to put
myself on medications.
So I reworked those mechanisms
of action, put myself
on a lifestyle protocol for
eight weeks, and I retested.
I got my results.
And I was elated.
I had rewound my biological
clock by a full two years
in eight weeks.
Now I know what you're thinking.
Stop.
Tell us what you did.
I will.
We'll get there.
More research was
coming out at the time.
So over the next year,
I tweaked my protocol.
And on my 35th
birthday, I retested.
And on my 35th birthday, I came
back at 31 and three quarters.
Thank you.
I went from four years older to
four years younger in just about
a year.
That is hope.
So we know that biological
age is the age of our cells.
We know that biological
age is reversible.
And we know that, that impacts
our fertility outcomes.
But how does this work?
We can't change our genes.
We can't change our DNA.
But we can change how
our genes are expressed.
We can turn some genes
up and some genes down.
And biological age is
a reflection of which
genes are turned up and down.
In fact, younger biological
age is telling us
that more good genes are
turned up and more bad genes
are turned down.
And this is important for
more than just conception.
We now know that
these gene knobs,
we actually pass them
down to our babies.
And this sets their health up
for the rest of their lives.
Think about that.
So what turns these
knobs up and down.
Everything we eat, drink,
breathe, touch, think, and feel.
And thankfully, we have
a lot more research now,
thanks to Dr. David Sinclair,
Dr. Kara Fitzgerald.
And we even have Bryan Johnson
has brought biological age
reversal to the mainstream
media through his rejuvenation
Olympics, which I must say
I was number 44 out of 8,000
for a period of time.
Thank you very much.
So I have distilled
down the things
that rewind the biological
clock into an acronym.
We call it the FAST
framework, F-A-S-T.
And it works pretty fast.
Fs are food,
fasting, and fitness.
A is associated conditions,
things like insulin resistance,
hypothyroidism.
S is sleep, stress,
supplementation.
T's are toxins and trauma.
And the two that were
most important for me
were also the ones I
was most resistant to,
which were fasting
and stress management.
But I have to say they
paid off in years.
Now I also experienced
other benefits
from rewinding my
biological clock.
I had lost weight.
I had more energy in focus.
My hair and skin
looked fabulous.
But honestly, the
most comfort came
from knowing that my
ovaries were younger.
So we know what
things are we can use
to rewind the biological clock.
And we also know that these
are the same things that
age us on the
outside, just like we
had those two 40-year-old women
who looked very different ages.
If you imagine a friend who
had childhood trauma, maybe
loves to party,
very stressful job,
maybe she smokes here and there.
She's probably not the youngest
looking friend in the group.
It doesn't have to
be that way, though.
We do see that advanced
chronological age
does impact fertility.
But why?
It's because women with
more chronological years
have more years of stress,
more years of toxin exposure,
more years of poor sleep,
more years of poor diet.
But it doesn't have
to be this way.
Why isn't anybody talking about
this in the fertility field?
Honestly conventional fertility
is a bit discouraging.
Oftentimes couples
are told to just keep
trying for up to a year before
any testing is even done.
This seems counterintuitive
for an industry
that puts so much
emphasis on time and age.
It's time for a paradigm shift.
Every couple and
every woman needs
to know that the choices she
makes every single day, even
a decade before she
wants to conceive impact
how fast their biological
clock is ticking.
And if they can have a healthy
baby on their timeline.
The future of fertility
starts right now.
The clock is ticking either way.
Let's use our ticks wisely.
Let's take test early, take
action, and make our ticks count
so that we can have healthy
babies on our timeline.
Today I'm living the
life that I hope for,
for every single
one of my patients.
I'm enjoying being newly
engaged to the love of my life.
I'm enjoying a fulfilling
career, creating families.
And I'm enjoying knowing that
my body is ready for baby
when I am.
And that is way less pressure.
I can relax and I can
actually enjoy life every day
because I know that
time is on my side.
And it can be for you too.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]